Working with branches (#9)
ImperialCollegeLondon/intermediate_grad_school_git_course: _episodes/l1-02-branching-merging.md

---
title: "Branching and Merging"
teaching: 40
exercises: 20
questions:
- How can I or my team work on multiple features in parallel?
- How can changes from parallel tracks of work be combined?
objectives:
- Explain what git branches are and when they should be used
- Use a branch to develop a new feature and incorporate it into your code
- Identify the branches in a project and which branch is currently in use
- Describe a scalable workflow for development with git
keypoints:
- Git allows non-linear commit histories called branches

> - A branch can be thought of as a label that applies to set of commits

Author: You're right, but I think it is more or less clear that it is a way of visualising things rather than the real thing.

- Branches can and should be used to carry out development of new features
- Branches in a project can be listed with git branch and created with git branch branch_name
- The HEAD refers to the current position of the project in its commit history
- The current branch can be changed using git checkout branch_name

> - Once a branch is complete the changes made can be integrated into the project using git merge branch_name

Reviewer: Some of these commands could be in backticks so they stand out more

- Merging creates a new commit in the target branch incorporating all of the changes made in a branch
- Conflicts arise when two branches contain incompatible sets of changes and must be resolved before a merge can complete

> - Identify the details of merge conflicts using git diff and/or git status
> - A merge conflict can be resolved by manual editing followed by git add [conflicted file]... and git commit -m "commit_message"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Identify the details of merge conflicts using `git diff` and/or `git status`
- A merge conflict can be resolved by manual editing followed by `git add [conflicted file]`... and `git commit -m "commit_message"`
```

---

## Motivation for branches

For simple projects, working with a single branch where you keep adding commits is good
enough. But chances are that you will want to unleash all the power of `git` at some
point and start using branches.

In a linear history, we have something like:

![Linear]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/branch1.png "Linear git
repository"){:class="img-responsive"}

* Commits are depicted here as little boxes with abbreviated hashes.
* Here the branch `main` points to a commit.
* "HEAD" is the current position (remember the recording head of tape
  recorders?).
* When we talk about branches, we often mean all parent commits, not only the
  commit pointed to.

### Now we want to do this:

<div style="border:2px solid #000000;"> <img src="{{ site.baseurl
  }}/fig/octopus.jpeg" width="60%"> <br> Source: <a
  href="https://twitter.com/jay_gee/status/703360688618536960">https://twitter.com/jay_gee/status/703360688618536960</a>
  </div>

Software development is often not linear:

* We typically need at least one version of the code to "work" (to compile, to
  give expected results, ...).

> * At the same time we work on new features, often several features concurrently.
>   Often they are unfinished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* At the same time we work on new features -- possibly several features concurrently.
  Often they are unfinished.
```

> * We need to be able to separate different lines of work really well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We need to be able to easily separate out work on different features.
```

Just a suggestion: on first reading I thought the "lines of work" maybe referred to lines of code or something.

of commit history wit multiple branches and merges"){:class="img-responsive"}

* We see branching points and merging points.
* Main line development is often called `main`.
* Other than this convention there is nothing special about `main`, it is just
  a branch.
* Commits form a directed acyclic graph (arrows point from parent commits to
  child commits).
* Commits are **relative** to the preceding (parent) commit. Whilst we
  previously talked about Git taking "snapshots" of your project this is
  slightly misleading. Git actually records *the changes made since the last
  commit*. The difference is subtle but powerful, it makes commands like `git
  revert` possible.

A group of commits that create a single narrative are called a **branch**.
There are different branching strategies, but it is useful to think that a
branch tells the story of a feature, e.g. "fast sequence extraction" or "Python
interface" or "fixing bug in matrix inversion algorithm".

> ## Starting point
>
> This episode will take as starting point for further development a repository
> containing the recipe for guacamole sauce (TODO: Create and upload that repository).

> > This repository, when unzip, contains a hidden `.git` folder that contains information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This repository, when unzipped, contains a hidden `.git` folder that contains information
```

> about the repository history. You can use it straight way simply by navigating to
> the repository in the terminal. If you then type `git status`, you should see
> something like:
>

> > ```ouput

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ```output
```

the conflict at some point though so may as well do it now. Fortunately we don't
need any new commands. We just need to edit the conflicted file into the state
we would like to keep, then add and commit as usual.

Let's look at ingredients.md to understand the conflict:
~~~
* 2 avocados
* 1 lime
<<<<<< HEAD
* 1 tsp salt
=======
* 3 tsp salt
>>>>>> experiment
* 1/2 onion
* 1 tbsp coriander
~~~

Git has changed this file for us and added some lines which highlight the
location of the conflict. This may be confusing at first glance (a good editor
may add some highlighting which can help), but you are essentially being asked
to choose between the two versions presented. The tags `<<<<<<< HEAD` and
`>>>>>>> experiment` are used to indicate which branch each version came from
(HEAD here corresponds to `main` as that is our checked out branch). 

The conflict makes sense, we can either have 1 tsp of salt or 3. There is no way
for Git to know which it should be so it has to ask you. Let's resolve it by
choosing the version from the main branch. Edit `ingredients.md` so it looks
like:
~~~
* 2 avocados
* 1 lime
* 1 tsp salt
* 1/2 onion
* 1 tbsp coriander
~~~

> now stage, commit and check the result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now stage, commit and check the result:
```

~~~
$ git add ingredients.md
$ git commit -m "Merged experiment into main"
$ git graph
~~~
{: .commands}
~~~
*   e361d2b (HEAD -> main) Merged experiment into main
|\  
| * d5fb141 (experiment) Added salt to balance coriander
* | 7477632 reduce salt
* |   567307e Merge branch 'experiment'
|\ \  
| |/  
| * 9a4b298 Reduced the amount of coriander
* |   40070a5 Merge branch 'experiment'
|\ \  
| |/  
| * 96fe069 try with some coriander
* | d4ca89f Corrected typo in ingredients.md
|/  
* ddef60e Revert "Added instruction to enjoy"
* 8bfd0ff Added 1/2 onion to ingredients
* 2bf7ece Added instruction to enjoy
* ae3255a Adding ingredients and instructions
~~~
{: .output}

![Git collaborative]({{ site.baseurl }}/fig/branch9.png
"Repository with third merge"){:class="img-responsive"}

## Multiple branches in remotes

The same way you might have different branches in your local repository, you could
manage different branches in your remote - the same branches or different ones.

> As a reminder, remote and local repositories are not automatically syncronized, but
> rather it is a manual process done via `git pull` and `git push` commands. This
> syncronisation needs to be done **branch by branch** with all of those you want to keep
> in sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reminder, remote and local repositories are not automatically synchronised, but
rather it is a manual process done via `git pull` and `git push` commands. This
synchronisation needs to be done **branch by branch** with all of those you want to keep
in sync.
```

Reviewer: I've used British spelling here, but there are a bunch of words ending in -ize elsewhere. I'm happy to fix up

Author: Don't worry, I'll check those
